update: set up kapt and configure processing (#5632)
JetBrains/kotlin-web-site: docs/topics/compiler-plugins/kapt.md

This enables Java-based annotation processing in your Kotlin projects for libraries like [MapStruct](https://mapstruct.org/)
and [Data Binding](https://developer.android.com/topic/libraries/data-binding/index.html).

> > kapt is not supported for IntelliJ IDEA's own build system. Launch the build from the **Maven Projects**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> IntelliJ IDEA's built-in build system doesn't support kapt. Launch the build from the **Maven**
```

Reviewer: Suggestion: does this work? 

Regarding Maven project? - do we mean the [maven tool window?](https://www.jetbrains.com/help/idea/maven-projects-tool-window.html) 🤔

> > toolbar whenever you want to re-run the annotation processing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> tool window whenever you want to re-run the annotation processing.
```

> 
{style="warning"}

> ## Set up the plugin

Reviewer: I like this structure a lot, I think it's a big improvement, do you think we could add a short intro here? 🤔 Just a paragraph to describe what build tools the user can use. Otherwise they have to check the ToC for the options.

> ### In Gradle

Reviewer: Do we need the In? 🤔 

``` 
### Gradle 
### Maven 
### CLI
```

We could add an id to differentiate from the other similar sections.

   </tab>
   </tabs>

3. If you previously used the [Android support](https://developer.android.com/build/annotation-processors)
   for annotation processors, replace usages of the `annotationProcessor` configuration with `kapt`.

>    If your project contains Java classes, the kapt plugin will also take care of them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   If your project contains Java classes, the kapt plugin processes them as well.
```

Reviewer: (suggestion) would this work? (the takes care of them is a bit vague)

   If you use annotation processors for your `androidTest` or `test` sources, the respective `kapt` configurations are named
   `kaptAndroidTest` and `kaptTest`. Note that `kaptAndroidTest` and `kaptTest` extend `kapt`, so you can provide the
   `kapt` dependency, and it will be available both for production sources and tests.

### In Maven

> 

Reviewer: same as above, I think a short intro would be nice.

#### Automatic configuration

You can simplify kapt configuration by enabling the `<extensions>` option for the Kotlin Maven plugin. In this case,
you don't need to manually set up kapt's `<execution>` section with goals or source directories.

> To automatically configure kapt, in your `pom.xml` build file, set the `<extensions>` option to `true` for the `kotlin-maven-plugin`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To automatically configure kapt, set the `<extensions>` option to `true` for the `kotlin-maven-plugin` in your `pom.xml` build file:
```

Reviewer: I understand the reason to put the file first, but it parses strange this way. 🤔

                <version>1.6.3</version>
            </annotationProcessorPath>
        </annotationProcessorPaths>
    </configuration>
</plugin>
```

For more information on the `<extensions>` option, see [Automatic configuration](maven-configure-project.md#automatic-configuration).

#### Manual configuration

To manually set up kapt in your Kotlin Maven project, add an execution of the `kapt` goal from `kotlin-maven-plugin` before the `compile` execution:

```xml
<execution>
    <id>kapt</id>
    <goals>
        <goal>kapt</goal>
    </goals>
    <configuration>
        <sourceDirs>
            <sourceDir>src/main/kotlin</sourceDir>
            <sourceDir>src/main/java</sourceDir>
        </sourceDirs>
        <annotationProcessorPaths>
            <!-- Specify your annotation processors here -->
            <annotationProcessorPath>
                <groupId>org.mapstruct</groupId>
                <artifactId>mapstruct-processor</artifactId>
                <version>1.6.3</version>
            </annotationProcessorPath>
        </annotationProcessorPaths>
    </configuration>
</execution>
```

##### Configure kapt annotation processing

> To configure the level of annotation processing, set one of the following as the `aptMode` in the `<configuration>` block:

Reviewer: "the level of annotation processing"  sounds a bit confusing until we get to the list. (does the level refer to strictness, verbosity, or something else?

Do you think something like this could work? 

To configure which annotation processing steps kapt runs, set the `<aptMode>` option in the `<configuration>` block to one of the following values:

Author: I decided to just use 'mode' from the option name for now. This whole section will be rewritten in the 3rd part of kapt revamp, when we have a dedicated section for all compiler options

Reviewer: sure thing, we can discuss it further then 👍

* `stubs` – only generate stubs needed for annotation processing.
* `apt` – only run annotation processing.
* `stubsAndApt` – (default) generate stubs and run annotation processing.

For example:

```xml
<configuration>
   ...
   <aptMode>stubs</aptMode>
</configuration>
```

### In CLI

> kapt compiler plugin is available in the binary distribution of the Kotlin compiler.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The kapt compiler plugin is available in the binary distribution of the Kotlin compiler.
```

> You can attach the plugin by providing the path to its JAR file using the `Xplugin` kotlinc option:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can attach the plugin by providing the path to its JAR file using the `-Xplugin` Kotlin compiler option:
```

```bash
-Xplugin=$KOTLIN_HOME/lib/kotlin-annotation-processing.jar
```

> Here is a list of the available options:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is the list of the available options:
```

Reviewer: or The following options are available: 🤔

* `sources` (*required*): An output path for the generated files.
* `classes` (*required*): An output path for the generated class files and resources.

> * `stubs` (*required*): An output path for the stub files. In other words, some temporary directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `stubs` (*required*): A temporary output path for the stub files.
```

* `incrementalData`: An output path for the binary stubs.

> * `apclasspath` (*repeatable*): A path to the annotation processor JAR. Pass as many `apclasspath` options as the number of JARs that you have.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `apclasspath` (*repeatable*): A path to the annotation processor JAR. Pass one `apclasspath` option for each JAR.
```

> * `apoptions`: A base64-encoded list of the annotation processor options. See [AP/javac options encoding](#ap-javac-options-encoding) for more information.

Reviewer: Do you think we could capitalize as Base64-encoded? 🤔 to be honest, I see it written as both in the API, but Base64-encoded seems more like the standard in general.

* `javacArguments`: A base64-encoded list of the options passed to javac. See [AP/javac options encoding](#ap-javac-options-encoding) for more information.

> * `processors`: A comma-specified list of annotation processor qualified class names. If specified, kapt does not try to find annotation processors in `apclasspath`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `processors`: A comma-separated list of annotation processor qualified class names. If specified, kapt does not try to find annotation processors in `apclasspath`.
```

* `verbose`: Enable verbose output.
* `aptMode` (*required*)
    * `stubs` – only generate stubs needed for annotation processing.
    * `apt` – only run annotation processing.
    * `stubsAndApt` – generate stubs and run annotation processing.
* `correctErrorTypes`: For more information, see [Non-existent type correction](#non-existent-type-correction). Disabled by default.
* `dumpFileReadHistory`: An output path to dump for each file a list of classes used during annotation processing.

The plugin option format is: `-P plugin:<plugin id>:<key>=<value>`. Options can be repeated.

> An example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here's an example:
```

}
```

### Configure processor classpath and discovery

You can disable the discovery of annotation processors that aren't included in kapt's processor path.

> This effectively excludes unnecessary annotation processors from the compile classpath.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This excludes unnecessary annotation processors from the compile classpath.
```

> #### For Gradle

Reviewer: I suggest making this consistent. let's just go with Gradle again and a separate id? 🤔

Gradle uses [compile avoidance](https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/java_plugin.html#sec:java_compile_avoidance)
to skip annotation processing during project rebuild, improving incremental build times with kapt. Particularly,
annotation processing is skipped when:

* The project's source files are unchanged.
* The changes in dependencies are [ABI](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Application_binary_interface)-compatible.

>   For example, the only changes are in method bodies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  For example, only function bodies changed, while the declarations that other code depends on stays the same.
```

Reviewer: wdyt, would this more extended version work?

However, compile avoidance can't be used for annotation processors discovered on the compile classpath, since changes

> in their internal implementation require running the annotation processing tasks, even if the ABI remains unchanged.

Reviewer: Do you think we could cut this sentence in half and add some extra description? not sure if this works so let me know:

However, compile avoidance doesn't work for annotation processors discovered on the compile classpath. Changes to an annotation processor's implementation can affect generated code, so kapt must run annotation processing tasks even if the processor's ABI remains unchanged.

> That's why we don't recommend using annotation processors from the compile classpath. To exclude these annotations

Reviewer: Are we excluding the annotations here or the annotation processor? 🤔  Something like: 
To prevent kapt from discovering or running these annotation processors...

Author: So, this is the only new section on this page that was just reviewd and approved, so I'd like to keep changes here to a minimum

Reviewer: sure thing — tbh the small change you made here cleared up the confusion imho

from processing, add the `kapt.include.compile.classpath` property to your `gradle.properties` file:

```none
# gradle.properties
kapt.include.compile.classpath=false
```

With the option set to `false`, annotation processor dependencies that aren't included in the processor path
(the `kapt*` configurations) are excluded from kapt processing.

#### For Maven

> To exclude annotation processors that are missing from kapt's processor path, set the `includeCompileClasspath`

Reviewer: missing or aren't included in the kapt's processor path? 🤔

option to `false` in the `<execution>` section of the kapt plugin:

```xml
<execution>
    <id>kapt</id>
    <goals>
        <goal>kapt</goal>
    </goals>
    <configuration>
        <includeCompileClasspath>false</includeCompileClasspath>
        <sourceDirs>...</sourceDirs>
        <annotationProcessorPaths>...</annotationProcessorPaths>
    </configuration>
</execution>
```

Alternatively, you can use the `kapt.include.compile.classpath` property in the `<properties>` section of your `pom.xml`:

```xml
<properties>
    <kapt.include.compile.classpath>false</kapt.include.compile.classpath>
</properties>
```

With the option set to `false`, annotation processors that aren't included in the `<annotationProcessorPaths>` section are
excluded from kapt processing.

If the `includeCompileClasspath` option isn't set and kapt detects an annotation processor on the compile classpath that isn't
explicitly defined in the processor path, you'll see a deprecation warning:

```none
[WARNING] Annotation processors discovery from compile classpath is deprecated.
Set 'kapt.include.compile.classpath=false' to disable discovery.
```

> > To see the list of annotation processors that aren't present on the kapt classpath, run the build with the `--info` log

Reviewer: hmm 🤔 
WDYT about something like: To see which annotation processors are discovered from the compile classpath but aren't included in kapt's processor path, run the build with the `--info` option.

> level option.
>
{style="tip"}

### Inherit annotation processors from superconfigurations

You can define a common set of annotation processors in a separate Gradle configuration as a
superconfiguration and extend it further in kapt-specific configurations for your subprojects.

As an example, for a subproject using [MapStruct](https://mapstruct.org/), in your `build.gradle(.kts)` file, use the following configuration:

```kotlin
val commonAnnotationProcessors by configurations.creating
configurations.named("kapt") { extendsFrom(commonAnnotationProcessors) }

dependencies {
    implementation("org.mapstruct:mapstruct:1.6.3")
    commonAnnotationProcessors("org.mapstruct:mapstruct-processor:1.6.3")
}
```

> In this example, the `commonAnnotationProcessors` Gradle configuration is your common superconfiguration for annotation processing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, the `commonAnnotationProcessors` Gradle configuration is the common superconfiguration for annotation processing
```

Reviewer: since it's an example perhaps it's better with the instead of your WDYT?

that you want to be used for all your projects. You use the [`extendsFrom()`](https://docs.gradle.org/current/dsl/org.gradle.api.artifacts.Configuration.html#org.gradle.api.artifacts.Configuration:extendsFrom)
method to add `commonAnnotationProcessors` as a superconfiguration. kapt sees that the `commonAnnotationProcessors`
Gradle configuration has a dependency on the MapStruct annotation processor. Therefore, kapt includes the MapStruct annotation processor
in its configuration for annotation processing.

### Keep Java compiler's annotation processors

By default, kapt runs all annotation processors and disables annotation processing by javac.

> However, you may need some of javac's annotation processors working (for example, [Lombok](https://projectlombok.org/)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, you may need javac to run some annotation processors, such as [Lombok](https://projectlombok.org/).
```

In the Gradle build file, use the option `keepJavacAnnotationProcessors`:

```groovy
kapt {
    keepJavacAnnotationProcessors = true
}
```

If you use Maven, configure the plugin explicitly.
See this [example of setting up the Lombok compiler plugin](lombok.md#using-with-kapt).

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

}
```

### Configure processor classpath and discovery

You can disable the discovery of annotation processors that aren't included in kapt's processor path.
This excludes unnecessary annotation processors from the compile classpath.

#### Gradle {id="classpath-discovery-gradle"}

Gradle uses [compile avoidance](https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/java_plugin.html#sec:java_compile_avoidance)
to skip annotation processing during project rebuild, improving incremental build times with kapt. Particularly,
annotation processing is skipped when:

* The project's source files are unchanged.
* The changes in dependencies are [ABI](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Application_binary_interface)-compatible.
  For example, when only function bodies change.

However, compile avoidance can't be used for annotation processors discovered on the compile classpath, since changes

> in their internal implementation require running the annotation processing tasks, even if processors' ABI remains unchanged.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in their internal implementation require running the annotation processing tasks, even if the processors' ABI remains unchanged.
```

Reviewer: nit
